in our input matrix
All the rows and columns are sorted
Thus this gives us a hint that we can use
binary search to solve this problem in arrays how
to be execute binary search
We will compare n with the middle element of the array
eliminate one half and safely proceed searching in the other
half
We have a matrix here the Key part is
From which element are we going to start comparing We
have to choose an element in such a way that
we could eliminate a few elements and safely proceed searching
in one part of the matrix
Let us assume that we're going to start the search
with any element in the middle of the matrix
First let us take elements
16 in 11 31 is greater than 16
Thus 31 cannot be present before 16 in first row
and about 16 in first column whereas elements after 16
in first row and below 16 in the first column
are all greater than 16
Thus we cannot safely proceed with the search in one
direction and if we take Element 39 present at 2 3
31 is less than 39 all elements before it in
second row and above it in third column are less
than 39 again we cannot proceed with the search in
one direction
Thus let us ignore all the elements in middle
We're left with four corner elements as
This is sorted matrix
Element 00 will be the least element
And this last element will be the largest element in
the matrix
Ignoring these two we are left with these two elements
And what is so special about the elements at these
two positions Let us take this element at zero three
It is the largest in this room and also the
smallest in this column
Thus if our n less than this element we can
eliminate this column and proceed to next element in
this room and if n is greater than this element
we can eliminate this row and proceed to the next
element in this column
Thus by comparing the element at this index with n
we can safely ignore one part and proceed with
the other
Same applies to the eliminate 30 Also Now with this
let us search 31
In this matrix let's have two variables I and J to
keep track of the element that we are going to
compare with n in each iteration
We're going to get started with Element at Zero Three
so I will be zero and J
Will be three initially 31 is greater than 24
Thus it cannot be present anywhere in this room
This we can eliminate this row and proceed to the
next element in this column
The index of this element is 13
This we have to increment I at 13
We have 36
31 is less than 36 so it cannot be
Present in this column so let us go to the element before
36 in this room
The index of this element is 12
That's we have to decrement J
Let's continue the same way
11 at 12 is 27
31 is greater than 27
Hence let's go to the next element in this column
by increment I element at 22 is 29 again
31 is greater than 29 so increment i again in 32
we have 32 31 is less than 32 so decrement
J Now J becomes one at index 31 we have
31 which is our end
This we can return True if n is not present in
the array when can we stop searching the matrix This is
a four by four matrix
Thus I and J can have values between zero and three initially we are
setting I to 0 and J to 3
Thus I can get incremental till it reaches Three and
J can get decremented till it reaches zero
If we search for 25 this matrix at some point
either I becomes four or J will become minus one
So at this point we can stop our search and
return false.